README.md, before:

# Introduction

This extension allows you to create a custom layout using simplified s-expressions.
It allows the user to enter the layout description using dmenu and creates the corresponding dynamic layout.

I have to admit that I almost never needed this functionality. *Tiling* and *monocle* layouts were always enough for me.
But I kind of wanted this functionality to be available nonetheless, so I decided to try implementing it for fun.
Hopefully someone may find it useful.

The syntax is basically s-expressions with outermost parentheses removed for convenience.

I tried to keep the code simple in the spirit of DWM, but in the end I decided to keep it as a separate file just so
it is easier to modify, test and distribute.

# Current state

It works. More tesing is needed and I still have a few items in my TODO. In particular, it does not take window margin
setting into account.

TODO:

- Support for windows margin/borders.
- Floating configuration for the containers (h, v, m). Currently the floating mode only works for **c** element.
- Empty container to hide the leftover windows.
- Provide a reasonable default for sxp layout.
- Perhaps, some syntax improvements, e.g. replace `(nth ...)` with something quicker.

# Examples

See screencasts at the end of the README for some live examples.
Here are some text examples.

`h c (v ...)`  
Simple tile layout.

`m ...`  
Monocle.

`h (c w: 1.5) (v c (m ...))`  
Tiling layout with weighted main viewport (1.5 times the neighbours).
The stack area is limited with two clients. The leftover windows will occupy the right bottom frame.

`h (v w: 1.2 (c w: 1.2) 1) (v ...)`  
Two windows in the master area. The master column is 1.2 times width the stack column and the first window is 1.2 times
the height of the second one.

`v ...`  
All clients arranged in a single column.

`h c (v (max 3) (m ...))`  
One master + four slots in the stack area. Every other window will be stacked in the last frame.

`h (nth 1) (nth 0)`  
Display first two clients from the list, the first after the second.
WARNING: In this setup the other clients will be left untouched from the 

# Syntax
## Containers
`(h ...)`  
Horizontal spread.
The nodes are distributed horizontally, according to the weight of each one.

`(hr ...)`
Reversed horizontal layout (clients are filled from right to left).

`(v ...)`  
Vertical spread.
The nodes are distributed vertically, according to the weight of each one.

`(vr ...)`  
Reversed vertical layout. Clients are filled from bottom to top.

`(m ...)`  
"Monocle". All clients share the same geometry.

## Elements
`c`  
A slot for a single client. 

`(nth <number>)`  
Pick a client from the client stack by the number.
`(nth 0)` represents the first client, `(nth 1)` - the second etc.

`(max <number>)`  
Provides a space for at most `<number>` clients in a container.

`...`  
The rest of the clients from the client stack.

## Node parameters
`w: <number>`  
Weight. Affects the amount of space the node takes relative to its neighbours.

`f: <x> <y> <width> <height>`  
Custom geometry, a.k.a. floating viewport. Can be a part of any container. Does not take the container's space.

# Installation and configuration

The patch is coming soon. For now the installation is manual, but should not be too difficult anyway.

## 1. Copy the *s_layout.c* file into the DWM folder.
## 2. Include it from *dwm.c* before including *config.h*
```c
...
static Drw *drw;
static Monitor *mons, *selmon;
static Window root, wmcheckwin;
static int restart = 0;

/*=== s_layout ===*/
#include "s_layout.c"

/* configuration, allows nested code to access above variables */
#include "config.h"
...
```

## 3. Add the layout to the layout list in your config.h:  
```c
static const Layout layouts[] = {
   /* symbol     arrange function */
   { "[]=",      tile },    /* first entry is default */
   { "[M]",      monocle },
   { "><>",      NULL },    /* no layout function means floating behavior */
   { "HHH",      grid },
   { "TTT",      bstack },

   { "SXP",      s_layout }, /* sxp_layout */
};
```

## 4. Add hotkeys for setlayout and set_s_layout functions.
set_s_layout will open dmenu so you can type the new layout in (don't forget to use Shift+Enter to override dmenu's hints), whereas setlayout will just switch you to the existing sxp layout.
```c
   ...
   { MODKEY,                       XK_t,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[0]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_m,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[1]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_f,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[2]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_g,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[3]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_u,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[4]} },

   { MODKEY,                       XK_s,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[5]}},
   { MODKEY|ShiftMask,             XK_s,      set_s_layout,   {.v = &layouts[5]}},
   ...
```

# Screencast 1

Playing around with simple layouts.

![](Screencast-1.gif)

# Screencast 2

Creating a floating viewport.

![](Screencast-2.gif)

Commit message:

More detailed explanation of the layout syntax

README.md, after:

# Introduction

This extension allows you to create a custom layout using simplified s-expressions.
It allows the user to enter the layout description using dmenu and creates the corresponding dynamic layout.

I have to admit that I almost never needed this functionality. *Tiling* and *monocle* layouts were always enough for me.
But I kind of wanted this functionality to be available nonetheless, so I decided to try implementing it for fun.
Hopefully someone may find it useful.

The syntax is basically s-expressions with outermost parentheses removed for convenience.

I tried to keep the code simple in the spirit of DWM, but in the end I decided to keep it as a separate file just so
it is easier to modify, test and distribute.

# Current state

It works. More tesing is needed and I still have a few items in my TODO. In particular, it does not take window margin
setting into account.

TODO:

- Support for windows margin/borders.
- Floating configuration for the containers (h, v, m). Currently the floating mode only works for **c** element.
- Empty container to hide the leftover windows.
- Provide a reasonable default for sxp layout.
- Perhaps, some syntax improvements, e.g. replace `(nth ...)` with something quicker.

# Examples

See screencasts at the end of the README for some live examples.
Here are some text examples.

`h c (v ...)`  
Simple tile layout.

`m ...`  
Monocle.

```
h (c w: 1.5) (v c (m ...))
|  |          | |  |  \_ all the leftover windows will be put here
|  |          | |  \_ monocle node (all windows under it will occupy the same frame)
|  |          | \_ single client 
|  |          \_ vertical layout node
|  \_ a place for one client with weight of 1.5 relative to its neighbours
\_ horizontal layout node
```  
Tiling layout with weighted main viewport (1.5 times the neighbours).
The stack area is limited with two clients. The leftover windows will occupy the right bottom frame.

```
h (v w: 1.2 (c w: 1.2) c) (v ...)
|  |         |         |   |  \_ all the leftover clients goes here
|  |         |         |   \_ vertical node
|  |         |         \_ another client (default weight is 1)
|  |         \_ a single client with weight of 1.2
|  \_ vertical node with weight of 1.2 (relative to its neighbours from the horizontal parent node)
\_ horizontal distribution node
```  
Two windows in the master area. The master column is 1.2 times width the stack column and the first window is 1.2 times
the height of the second one.

```
h (c f: 200 200 900 700) (nth 1) (m ...))
|  |                      |       |  \_ all other clients
|  |                      |       \_ monocle layout
|  |                      \_ get the second client from the leftover client list (we already allocated space for one client, so (nth 1) in fact will refer to 2-nd client
|  \_ a slot for a single client with custom geometry (floating); it will not occupy the space from the parent h layout
\_ horizontal layout
```  

`v ...`  
All clients arranged in a single column.

`h c (v (max 3) (m ...))`  
One master + four slots in the stack area. Every other window will be stacked in the last frame.

`h (nth 1) (nth 0)`  
Display first two clients from the list, the first after the second.
WARNING: In this setup the other clients will be left untouched from the 

# Syntax
## Containers
`(h ...)`  
Horizontal spread.
The nodes are distributed horizontally, according to the weight of each one.

`(hr ...)`
Reversed horizontal layout (clients are filled from right to left).

`(v ...)`  
Vertical spread.
The nodes are distributed vertically, according to the weight of each one.

`(vr ...)`  
Reversed vertical layout. Clients are filled from bottom to top.

`(m ...)`  
"Monocle". All clients share the same geometry.

## Elements
`c`  
A slot for a single client. 

`(nth <number>)`  
Pick a client from the client stack by the number.
`(nth 0)` represents the first client, `(nth 1)` - the second etc.

`(max <number>)`  
Provides a space for at most `<number>` clients in a container.

`...`  
The rest of the clients from the client stack.

## Node parameters
`w: <number>`  
Weight. Affects the amount of space the node takes relative to its neighbours.

`f: <x> <y> <width> <height>`  
Custom geometry, a.k.a. floating viewport. Can be a part of any container. Does not take the container's space.

# Installation and configuration

The patch is coming soon. For now the installation is manual, but should not be too difficult anyway.

## 1. Copy the *s_layout.c* file into the DWM folder.
## 2. Include it from *dwm.c* before including *config.h*
```c
...
static Drw *drw;
static Monitor *mons, *selmon;
static Window root, wmcheckwin;
static int restart = 0;

/*=== s_layout ===*/
#include "s_layout.c"

/* configuration, allows nested code to access above variables */
#include "config.h"
...
```

## 3. Add the layout to the layout list in your config.h:  
```c
static const Layout layouts[] = {
   /* symbol     arrange function */
   { "[]=",      tile },    /* first entry is default */
   { "[M]",      monocle },
   { "><>",      NULL },    /* no layout function means floating behavior */
   { "HHH",      grid },
   { "TTT",      bstack },

   { "SXP",      s_layout }, /* sxp_layout */
};
```

## 4. Add hotkeys for setlayout and set_s_layout functions.
set_s_layout will open dmenu so you can type the new layout in (don't forget to use Shift+Enter to override dmenu's hints), whereas setlayout will just switch you to the existing sxp layout.
```c
   ...
   { MODKEY,                       XK_t,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[0]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_m,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[1]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_f,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[2]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_g,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[3]} },
   { MODKEY,                       XK_u,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[4]} },

   { MODKEY,                       XK_s,      setlayout,      {.v = &layouts[5]}},
   { MODKEY|ShiftMask,             XK_s,      set_s_layout,   {.v = &layouts[5]}},
   ...
```

# Screencast 1

Playing around with simple layouts.

![](Screencast-1.gif)

# Screencast 2

Creating a floating viewport.

![](Screencast-2.gif)
